---
layout: post
title:  "Wordle Partitions"
---

For some reason, the Wordle game at https://www.powerlanguage.co.uk/wordle/ is going viral. As such, people are asking questions about "what is the best word to guess first" and "what is the optimal strategy." There are several misconceptions about wordle as a computational problem so I am writing this blog post as an attempt to correct these misconceptions. I would like to note that I have not been able to prove I am right, but both proving me right and proving me wrong seem to be challenging computational problems, so if you have a proof of either, please let me know.

First of all, there are 2315 words that the Wordle website can choose from when creating the puzzle. These are directly encoded into the javascript code on the website: it's quite easy to pull out. Along with these, there are 10657 additional words that are not chosen to be part of the puzzle but are allowable guesses. Essentially, these will always be wrong guesses, but they might provide more insight on what the right guess is. Additionally, the answer to the Wordle question is stored in the session storage. You can run ``JSON.parse(localStorage.gameState).solution`` to get it, but this spoils the puzzle for you so you shouldn't.

The other guaranteed thing is that each guess you make lowers the possible words the solution can be. This can be straightforwardly implemented through a filter on the 2315 available words. I have implemented such a tool and I admit I use it sometimes when I have no clue what word can possibly fit as the solution.

If you're going to implement such a solver yourself, here's a common misconception: each letter slot is not independent. What does this mean? Let's say the solution is the word ``petty`` and you guess the word ``tatty``. It is obvious that the two t's that hit should be green, but what about the first t? If we go by the principle of "if the letter exists, but in the wrong spot, it should be yellow" then the first t should appear as yellow. However, this is not how the game is written and the first t will appear as gray, because the other two slots have already been filled with t's. As such, the coloring result you get from the guess in the first slot is dependent on the results in other slots. The first t is gray if we guess ``tatty`` but yellow if we guess ``tally``. While this doesn't present itself to be too much an issue to implement properly, it does have mathematical implications on finding optimal solutions as we can't analyze each letter by itself.

What is independent though? Let's say you make a sequence of 3 guesses. After these guesses, you get a filtered result of possible words. Now, you rearrange these 3 guesses so they are in a different order than what you gave initially. You will still end up with the same filtered set at the end! This is a nice property because it tells us that when the solution is fixed, the order of guesses we make are arbitrarty.

Warning: this does not mean we should swap guesses all the time. In our first guess, we have no informational content as to what the solution might be. In the second guess however, we do know the result of the first guess, so we have limited the search space down a little. If we choose to find the optimal second guess, we must use the information we get from the first guess, making the second guess not independent. To clear this distinction, the order of guesses are only independent if the guesses have already been made, not if you are about to make them.

Now, here is where we enter the "uncertain" territory. We wish to find an algorithm that optimally solves wordle in the least amount of guesses. Conversely, we wish to find an adverserial algorithm that always gives you the worst result you can get from your guesses. While we can write an algorithm for these things rather easily with brute force, the algorithms will never finish running (will take several years to run), so finding mathematical ways of making this better than just brute force is a must.

I present a greedy solution that I have implemented, and many other people on the internet have also implemented concurrently. We start with 2315 possible words, so we greedily pick the word that will lower this number as much as possible, regardless of what the result we get back is. Essentially, this becomes min-max game theory like problem where we are playing against an adverserial target. There are two schools of thought in this regard: do we want the lowest average, or do we want the lowest maximum? These are both directing towards two kinds of optimals: average case optimal and worst case optimal.

As other blog posts have confirmed, ``SOARE`` is the first guess word that lowers the average of the partition sizes. In my calculations, ``ARISE`` is the first guess word that lowers the worst case largest size of the partitions. There might be other words that are equivalent in this partitioning ability as the word ``ARISE``.

If we implement a solver that always partitions the possible filtered set so that the worst case is minimized, then that is a pretty good solver. Many people including myself have already implemented this. We can also use this same strategy to implement an adverserial Wordle: give the result that gives you the biggest remaining filtered set, which screws the player.

While it is true that this is A good algorithm and AN evil adverserial algorithm, it is not necessarily true that it is THE BEST such algorithm as we have implemented this greedily. Why? Because it is not necessarily true that a larger partition is harder to guess than a smaller one. If we had all 26^5 english words to guess with, we could partition the partitions as evenly as we want, making the greedy solution be the optimal solution. However, we don't have that many words in the English language, so a word to partition the partition optimally might not exist. As such, a small set of English words might be in-separable by a few guesses, while a large set can be easily partitioned by just one guess.

I have not been able to find the direct constructive evidence of such sets to provide a definitive proof of this misconception, but neither is there a proof that I am wrong. I have decided to not delay this post because of not knowing the solution since Wordle is going very viral.

It would be nice to find the existence of an inseparable triplet: three words that guarantee that you can't solve the problem in just two guesses. This is impossible for the two word case because if you guess one and it's wrong, you know it is the other, but it might be possible in the three word case, just haven't found one. Note that you are allowed any first guess, even one that is guaranteed to be be wrong, as long as you guarantee the second guess.

Interestingly, a game similar to Wordle but with numbers doesn't have this issue since all non-repeating 4 digits are allowed guesses. This game is called Bulls and Cows, but I learned it by another name growing up called toke y fama. In this, we can partition the partition optimally, so the greedy solution works. This problem has already been heavily studied.

If you find a definite worst case based optimal solution with an associated proof, I would like to see it. I'm not sure if there will be one any time soon. Proving this conjecture of partition sizes might be easier to show, but doesn't bring us any closer to an optimal solution (unless I'm wrong and the greedy solution is optimal which is a nice win). Also, if you would like recognition for effort in answering these questions, I would be happy to add a link to your blog post here.

### UPDATE (22/02/09):

It seems like a method of analyzing wordle's worst case complexity has been found! I had conjectured the idea of ``finding a subset of words that is inseparable" and someone actually found one. The set of words that was words that end in ILLS.

You can see the post on [this website](https://alexpeattie.com/blog/establishing-minimum-guesses-wordle/)

Now combine it with a shitton of compute power to find A tree that solves in at most 6 guesses, such as the work done on (this website)[https://www.poirrier.ca/notes/wordle/], then we got it! An optimial algorithm in the worst case!

It seems very easy to find trees of at most 7 guesses. And 6 is only just one guess better than 7 guesses. All the algorithms out there that claim to be the best likely end up in either 6 or 7 guesses, so for those that do always solve it in 6, they really can claim to be the best.